docs: create page for "Building APISIX" (#7219)
apache/apisix: docs/en/latest/building-apisix.md

#
# Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
# distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
# WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
# See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
# limitations under the License.
#
-->

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

If you are looking to contribute to APISIX or setup a development environment, this guide is for you.

If you are looking to install and run APISIX, check out the [Installation](/docs/apisix/how-to-build) docs.

:::note

If you want to build and package APISIX for a specific platform, see [apisix-build-tools](https://github.com/api7/apisix-build-tools).

:::

## Building APISIX from source

To start, you have to install some dependencies. APISIX provides a handy script to get these installed:

```shell
curl https://raw.githubusercontent.com/apache/apisix/master/utils/install-dependencies.sh -sL | bash -
```

Then, create a directory and set the environment variable `APISIX_VERSION`:

```shell
APISIX_VERSION='2.14.1'
mkdir apisix-${APISIX_VERSION}
```

> You can now download the APISIX source code by running the command below. You can also download the source package from the [Downloads page](https://apisix.apache.org/downloads/). You will also find source packages for APISIX Dashboard and APISIX Ingress Controller.

Reviewer: > You can now download the APISIX source code by running the command below

The command to download the APISIX source code is missing?

Author: @spacewander Completely missed this. Thanks for pointing it out. Fixed.

:::

To uninstall the APISIX runtime, run:

```shell
make uninstall
make undeps
```

:::danger

This operation will remove the files completely.

:::

## Installing etcd

APISIX uses [etcd](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd) to save and synchronize configuration. Before running APISIX, you need to install etcd on your machine. Installation methods based on your operating system are mentioned below.

<Tabs
  groupId="os"
  defaultValue="linux"
  values={[
    {label: 'Linux', value: 'linux'},
    {label: 'macOS', value: 'mac'},
  ]}>
<TabItem value="linux">

```shell
ETCD_VERSION='3.4.18'
wget https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd/releases/download/v${ETCD_VERSION}/etcd-v${ETCD_VERSION}-linux-amd64.tar.gz
tar -xvf etcd-v${ETCD_VERSION}-linux-amd64.tar.gz && \
  cd etcd-v${ETCD_VERSION}-linux-amd64 && \
  sudo cp -a etcd etcdctl /usr/bin/
nohup etcd >/tmp/etcd.log 2>&1 &
```

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="mac">

```shell
brew install etcd
brew services start etcd
```

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Running and managing APISIX server

To initialize the configuration file and etcd, within the APISIX directory, run:

```shell

> apisix init

Reviewer 2: `apisix init` don't initialized the etcd resources, `apisix init_etcd` does.

```

:::tip

You can run `apisix help` to see a list of available commands.

:::

You can then test the created configuration file by running:

```shell
apisix test
```

Finally, you can run the command below to start APISIX:

```shell
apisix start
```

To stop APISIX, you can use either the `quit` or the `stop` subcommand.

`apisix quit` will gracefully shutdown APISIX. It will ensure that all received requests are completed before stopping.

```shell
apisix quit
```

> Whereas, the `apisix stop` command does a force shutdown and discards all pending requests.

Reviewer 2: `Whereas` typo ?

```shell
apisix stop
```

## Building OpenResty for APISIX

Some features of APISIX requires additional Nginx modules to be introduced into OpenResty.

> To use these features, you need to build OpenResty. See [apisix-build-tools](https://github.com/api7/apisix-build-tools) for setting up your build environment and building OpenResty.

Reviewer 3: OpenResty also can't meet our needs. In fact, we installed APISIX-base, which is the Nginx version with many patches.

## Running tests

> The steps below show how you can run the test cases for APISIX:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The steps below show how to run the test cases for APISIX:
```
It seems that the personal pronouns can be dropped.

1. Install [cpanminus](https://metacpan.org/pod/App::cpanminus#INSTALLATION), the package manager for Perl.
2. Install the [test-nginx](https://github.com/openresty/test-nginx) dependencies with `cpanm`:

   ```shell
   sudo cpanm --notest Test::Nginx IPC::Run > build.log 2>&1 || (cat build.log && exit 1)
   ```

3. Clone the test-nginx source code locally:

   ```shell
   git clone https://github.com/openresty/test-nginx.git
   ```

4. Append the current directory to Perl's module directory by running:

   ```shell
   export PERL5LIB=.:$PERL5LIB
   ```

   You can specify the Nginx binary path by running:

   ```shell
   TEST_NGINX_BINARY=/usr/local/bin/openresty prove -Itest-nginx/lib -r t
   ```

> 5. Run the tests by running:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Run the test by running:
```

Author: Doesn't `make test` run all the tests?

Reviewer 4: > Doesn't make test run all the tests?

yes

   ```shell
   make test
   ```

:::note

Some tests rely on external services and system configuration modification. See [ci/linux_openresty_common_runner.sh](https://github.com/apache/apisix/blob/master/ci/linux_openresty_common_runner.sh) for a complete test environment build.

:::

### Troubleshooting

These are some common troubleshooting steps for running APISIX test cases.

#### Configuring Nginx path

> For the error `Error unknown directive "lua_package_path" in /API_ASPIX/apisix/t/servroot/conf/nginx.conf`, ensure that OpenResty is set to the default Nginx and export the path as follows:

Reviewer 2: Would be better to use `apisix-base` as a default runtime.

Author: Where should I add this?

Reviewer 4: Right now we only provide the rpm for `apisix-base` for centos, other systems need to build apisix-base from source.

So just mention `apisix-base` in this post.

- Linux default installation path:

  ```shell
  export PATH=/usr/local/openresty/nginx/sbin:$PATH
  ```

- macOS default installation path (view homebrew):

  ```shell
  export PATH=/usr/local/opt/openresty/nginx/sbin:$PATH
  ```

> #### Running a single test case

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Running the specific test case
```
Would be better ?
